Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always, Ricardo Lobs. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Amanda Potan. She is
Professor Emeritus of History at California State Polytechnic University.
She specializes in the study of Syria and Mesopotamia
in the middle and late Bron Bronze age. And
she is the author of books like The Land
of Hannah, the Ancient Near Eastern World Brotherhood of
Kings, the ancient near East, a very short introduction
and weavers scribes and kings, a new history of
the ancient, near east. And today we're talking of
course about Mesopotamia, the early Old Babylonian period, the
basically the second millennium BC Hammurabi reign, kingdom of
the late Bronze age and the legacy of Mesopotamia.
If, if we get there. So Doctor Podany, welcome
to the show. It's a huge honor to have
you and I've been really a big fan of
yours and your work. So thank you so much
for accepting the invitation. Oh,
thank you so much for inviting me. It's a
pleasure to be here.
So to start perhaps with the most basic question
here, what was actually Mesopotamia? Because particularly, I mean,
for people who are not historians or historians of
Mesopotamia. Actually, before I got across your work and
the work of your call, I mean, sometimes I
thought, oh, is Babylonia the same as Mesopotamia? What's
the distinction there? Because it's more common for us
to hear, I guess about Babylonia specifically? So what
is Mesopotamia? Really?
Mesopotamia is actually the term that the Greeks gave
to this region. It's the region that is now
Iraq and parts of Syria. And um in ancient
times, there wasn't a name for the entire land,
they just called it Kam, which meant the land.
And so uh we now have given it the
name Mesopotamia or the Greeks did. And it's a
useful name because it was a culturally um consistent
area from the Gulf almost to the Mediterranean Sea.
Um And it's bounded of course by the Euphrates
River and the Tigris River because Mesopotamia means the
land between the rivers and it had as you
suggest many different names over time, which is why
you get the confusion is Babylonia the same as
Mesopotamia. Babylonia is part of Mesopotamia. It's these sort
of in, in later periods, it's the southern part,
whereas Assyria was uh in the north and then
very confusingly, Assyria, a Ss and Syria are um
the western and eastern parts of the uh the
northern part of Mesopotamia. So Assyria in the east
and Syria in the west. And then of course,
it had earlier names as well. Um BEFORE Babylonia
and Assyria became the, the two halves of Mesopotamia,
there was a region called Sumer in the South.
Um There was a region called Accad in the
center and Suma and Accad later became known as
Babylonia. So there are lots of names but, but
we sort of group them together as Mesopotamia.
And when we look back in history, we hear
many times when it comes to the big ancient
civilizations, people talking about places like Egypt, Greece, Rome,
China, some of the civilizations in, in Central and
South America. Why is it that Mesopotamia seems to
have been neglected in the history a lot or
at least until recently.
Um It's had its moments. It's very interesting. There
was a phase in the 19 twenties where there
was a sort of um bad for all things
mesopotamian. But you're right today, if you look in
a museum bookstore or you look online for videos
documentaries, that kind of thing, you're right. There's a
lot about Greece and Rome. There's a lot about
Egypt. It's probably less about ancient China. Unfortunately, it's
a fascinating region. Um But you're right for the
Mediterranean region, Mesopotamia just doesn't have the same public
awareness. People are less aware of, of Mesopotamia. The
reason I'm not sure. Um I think partly it
has to do with, when you think of Greece
and Rome, they were never forgotten. Nobody ever forgot
how to read Greek or Latin. So there was
a continuous tradition in the west of reading the
Greek and Roman classics and of visiting, you know,
the, the great cities and so forth. Egypt was
so dramatic with all of its huge stone monuments
that pyramids never were covered by sand. You know,
they were always there. And I think that that
meant that Egypt was a point of fascination. Even
before hieroglyphs could be read. There was a sense
that this was a very, very ancient and grand
civilization. Mesopotamia was still, it was known, it wasn't
unknown, of course, because the Bible has records of
the Assyrians. And there were um, travelers throughout, I
think, ever ever since ancient times who were aware
that a great civilization had existed there. But it
wasn't well known because aside from the Bible, very
little was known about the, about the culture and
the Bible only covered the very latest sort of
periods, like I say, very latest from the first
millennium onwards was sort of familiar BC was familiar
from the Bible. And so it wasn't until archaeologists
began excavating in the 19th century that the civilization
that was there became clear and interesting, but in
terms of what's actually there to visit, they built
largely out of mud brick. And so there's nothing
there like the Parthenon, there's nothing there like the
pantheon in, in Rome or like the Great Pyramids,
tourists going to visit Iraq to see the ancient
monuments. Um Unless they've been rebuilt and, and restored.
There's really not much to see and I think
that's part of it as well that the, the
drama of the great buildings of the other ancient
cultures are, are missing. And what's I, I think
is the most fascinating thing about Mesopotamian culture, which
is the hundreds of thousands of documents that survive
and that can be read scholars in the field,
know about them, but it hasn't become particularly um
familiar territory for general readers. They don't know that
there's this vast amount of fascinating information that we
have and not just about the leaders but about
everyday people who lived at the time and whose
contracts and letters and things like this survive. So
we have this really, really rich phenomenal amount of
information about mesopotamian culture, which I think people would
find fascinating if they knew about. But you're right
that there's, there's much less um that's been written
and discussed about it in the, in sort of
public forums
and also in mentioning other ancient civilizations. I mean,
in terms of the timeline that we're talking about
here, we usually talk about the civilizations that developed
between the Tigris and the Euphrates rivers and as
the gravel of civilization. But were these really what
we could call the first civilizations in the entire
world or not? You
know, there's a lot of stuff to unpack there.
One is the term civilization. Um And I, you're
right, I just used it but it is a
bit of a difficult uh difficult um term. Um
I think it's better to talk about urban culture
because we can certainly view people who had lived
before urban culture as having been civilized. You know.
And then there are the, well, what constitutes a
civilization? Do you have to have writing? Do you
have to have monumental architecture? There's a lot of
discussion about it and I think that that means
that it's, it's a tricky, it's a tricky term.
But if we talk about urban culture, big cities
and people living together in a situation where they,
there are tens of thousands of people living in
the same place that as far as we know,
the earliest city like that probably was the city
of Uruk in Mesopotamia. But we only have what's
been excavated and to say it's definitely the, the
earliest I think would, although, yeah, it's, it's often
described as the first, the more I think about
it and the more that I write about these
um these cultures, the more I suspect that there's
contemporary or, or Egypt, for example, was developing cities
right around the same time. Um Who knows, they're
finding interesting things in China that we going earlier
and earlier in Chinese culture in South Asia as
well. So I don't want to sort of put
my neck out. Say yes, absolutely. The earliest city,
it was one of the earliest. Absolutely. And it's
one of the earliest that we know well, because
of the amount that has survived from the early
cities there. Yeah.
And what we now historically refer to as Mesopotamia
and Mesopotamian civilization in terms of the timeline, when
exactly do you place it start? And when did
it come to end? Then uh
another very trick question. Um If we take it
with the beginnings of cities, I would say about
3500 BCE U have something that looks like a
city with monumental architecture. Um Tens of thousands of
people living in one place. And, but when it
ended, is really controversial because you could say it
ended with the arrival of Cyrus of Persia in
539 BCE because that was the end of local
rule. That after Cyrus, the rulers who were ruling
the region were not living in Mesopotamia. But the
culture didn't change almost at all. They continued to
use ka for they continued to use the same
languages. The people living through Cyrus's arrival wouldn't fit
up. That's it. That's the end. So I don't
think that's right. And then other people will say,
well, it was the arrival of Alexander the great
in um and, and sort of maybe they put
323 BCE as the end. But again, there's a
lot of people who do studies of the ancient
Middle East and Mesopotamia after Alexander the great all
the way up through the Parthian period, they were
still using C form sometimes and there was still
some references to the ancient gods. So there's no
real uh you can sort of put a date
on it and say that that's the end, it
gradually faded away with the introduction of first Persian
culture and later hellenistic Greek and Roman, that little
bits of the culture still existed. But the um
the influences of other uh other cultures that, that
were dominant in the region became more and more
prominent. And by about about the year one, almost
nobody could read can form anymore. So if you,
if you think about the um the sort of
BCE ce uh break being approximately when, when we
can say it was pretty much gone.
And of course, as you mentioned earlier in the
Bible, for example, we can find mentions to some
of the kingdoms and empires in Ancient Mesopotamia. But
when was it exactly that historians and archaeologists first
found out that there were actually ancient civilizations in
the ancient, near east and perhaps a few of
them were still unknown. They, that
the, the site of ancient, like Nineveh Babylon, I
don't think they'd ever been forgotten. The people living
in the region knew that that was where those
cities were. And uh so travelers had visited them
like in the 16th century, 17th century from um
western travelers. But of course, within the Middle East,
people had been very familiar with the region and
the civilizations all along. I think the big turning
point was when they started to excavate at the
sites formally um in the mid 19th century, uh
early, early, early to mid 19th century. And they
began to find real evidence, especially in the North
in the region of Assyria of these enormous palaces
and um relief sculptures. And at the beginning of
this, the big interest was of course, with the
connections to the Bible that when um excavators came
from France or Britain or um or the United
States, they came as one of my professors said,
with the Bible in one hand and a and
a shovel in the other, they were looking for
evidence for what was recorded in the Bible and
they found it, they found the kings Sakib as
I had. And these kings that are named in
the Bible were the kings who built those early
palaces. And so there was a great deal of
interest at that time in these discoveries. And then
when can air form was deciphered again, enormous amount
of um of interest. But your question about when
they found the civilizations that had been unknown until
uh until then, this was really when they started
excavating in the South around um the beginning early
19 hundreds, they were excavating in, for example, the
region of or and finding that there were levels
long before the Assyrians, thousands of years before the
Assyrians. And that was a shock. This was a
culture that had been completely forgotten. This is the
culture of the Sumerians. And I think then there
was a sense of the really deep and long
lasting culture that the Assyrians were quite late. The
Neo Assyrian empire that's recorded in the Bible and
was contemporary with the um uh uh the, the
writers of the Bible. Um OBVIOUSLY, the Bible was
written over a long period of time, but some
of the writers of the Bible that was quite
late in terms of, of Mesopotamian civilization. The Assyrians
were building on a culture that had been almost
3000 years previous to them had been thriving with
the same gods and the same writing system and
such continuity previous to the Assyrians
and talking about the writing system, at least as
far as we know, Mesopotamia was probably the region
of the globe where written language was first developed.
It was one of them, it depends how you
define writing. Um There were certainly signs being used
in Egypt, uh written some sort of written signs
around the same time. There are some claims that
there were some of uh a script in South
Asia was was early as well. But we know
a lot about the Ka form writing system and
it was one of the earliest, if not the
earliest, but its very beginnings. It was not a
writing system really. It was a almost like a
memory aid because the very earliest signs were not
designed to represent spoken language. They were a way
of recording um administration. So there were signs for
numbers and there were signs for nouns, um objects,
cows, sheep, bushels of barley, um jugs of beer,
that kind of thing. And the early texts are
just those, they're just numbers and um and objects.
And so that's not really writing. If you think
about it, it's not writing in the way that
we think of it. It took a while for
that system to develop into a system where you
could record spoken language where you could record verbs
and names. And um and it, it took becoming
a syllabic script for that to develop.
Uh Yeah. O originally, it was used mostly I,
I mean, whatever symbols they used, it was mostly
for um uh I mean, just a practical purposes,
right? I mean, prac having to do with people,
what were people were doing in their daily lives
and, and to be registered for them to keep
a track of people's activities and so on. It
was not exactly about writing poems and literature and
all of that that came later, right? It
did much later when and it wasn't so much
people's daily lives. It was the palace and the
temple that needed the writing system because from very
early on and the earliest writing is from the
city of U, which is, as I say, the
earliest city, the the writing system, which is around
3200 BCE or so when they first started using
it was all about the goods coming into the
temple, the goods coming out of the temple, into
the warehouses, out of the warehouses, this, the lists
and they have, um, total at the bottom and
they, they're doing their arithmetic and adding everything up
and then they began to use the signs as
the sound of the word rather than just the
word. So if you think about um, the word
be like a, a buzzing bee, right? You could
draw a, a bee and you would, you could
use it for the sound be and they did
did that. They began to do that for words
that were very hard to draw. So um a
classic example is that uh the, the word G
in Sumerian meant read like a reed that grows
on a riverbank, but it also meant the verb
to return. So you could draw a read and
read it as as to return. And that's a
very useful word if you're doing administration so that
you begin to see the the use of the
of the sound of the word being used to
express uh words that are very hard to, to
draw and then that then becomes eventually a system.
And it was never fully um phonetic as a
system. The Kar form writing system, some signs were
used for whole words, some signs were used for
sounds, uh always a syllable rather than a single
consonant. So it would have been you know, consonant,
vowel, consonant or constant vowel or something like that.
And, and then the other thing that they could
use the signs for were what we called determinative,
which was a sign that you didn't read aloud.
But it told you what the next word was
going to be. So there was, for example, a
determinative if the word was something made out of
wood. So you had the word determinative and that
told you that the next sign was a wooden
object or there was a determinative for a city.
And so it told you the next, actually, the
preceding word was the name of a city. All
of those kinds of, of ways of using can
form and made it a complicated system. But it
was one that was very expressive by the time
it developed and could in fact properly represent language.
So things like the epic, the epic of Gilgamesh
were things that came much later in writing history,
right?
They did after it took several 100 years for
them to start thinking of using writing for something
other than administration. And one of the first things
they used to it to record were um legal,
legal contracts, um legal records of someone giving land
to someone else or selling land to someone else,
that kind of thing then, oh, I should mention
that one thing that was written very early on
at the same time as m administration were lists
of words called lexical texts. And this was because
scribes had to learn how to use the writing
system to keep track of the administration. And so
they went to school and there's evidence of schools
very early on. And at school, they would learn
these lists of nouns or lists of verbs. And
so those are very early as well. But anything
that looks like literature is indeed much later. The
earliest would be probably king's royal inscriptions where the
king claims to have conquered the neighbors or, you
know, whatever those around maybe 2425 2500 BCE, you
get royal inscriptions. And only after that do they
start writing literary works? And interestingly when you find
literary works, they're almost always found in scribal schools
rather than that. It's, it's not something that people
would have in their house. You know, I have
a copy of the epic of Gilgamesh. It tended
to be when scribes were learning to write, they
learned to write these epics and poems and that's
where we find them is in um scribble exercises.
Another very interesting thing that I got from reading
your books and watching some of your lectures is
how linguistically and ethnically diverse Mesopotamia was actually because
I mean, of course, again, going back to the
fact that uh I mean, people commonly don't know
much about Mesopotamia, they just might think that it
was just one single people or even if it
was divided into different Kingdoms and then empires and
so on. We were still talking about basically people
with the same group, identity or something along those
lines. But it was actually not, that was actually
not the case. It
wasn't. Yes. From the very earliest times, uh the
Sumerian language which was spoken in the South is
a completely radically different from the Acadian language which
was spoken in the center in the north of,
of Mesopotamia. So different that they are completely different
language families. And Sumerian is what's called an isolate
in that it has no descendants. There is no
language, no modern language that has reliably been um
uh identified as descending from Sumerian, whereas Acadian is
a Semitic language. And therefore, it is, it shares
a lot in common with modern Arabic, with modern
Hebrew, with Aramaic, with many Semitic languages that came
in between. And so those are two apparently indigenous
languages. Although there's some question as to what uh
when the Sumerians arrived, if they, where they came
from, if they came from somewhere. Um Those are
are are certainly though indigenous, the the Semitic and
the Sumerian languages, but then people moved in from
outside at various times. So there are waves of
immigrants, Mesopotamia is not very well isolated. I mean,
Egypt, if you can think of Egypt, it's got
these. Uh AND this is the classic thing everyone
says about Egypt. There are barriers on all sides,
there's desert, on two sides, there's the cataracts to
the south and there's the Mediterranean Sea to the
north. So there's not an easy way of getting
into Egypt in large numbers. Other people did in
Mesopotamia, there's just open borders in many, in many
directions. And so people came in from the highlands
and they brought languages from the highlands, from the
Zagros Mountains, people moved in from the west and
they would bring their languages from the west, there's
and from the north as well. So you have
this very um uh linguistically diverse population. And from
the very earliest texts written, we can tell that
people were bilingual because you have, for example, texts
written in Sumerian and the scribe's name is Acadian.
And so we know from his name that he
was an Acadian speaker, but he was writing all
of his, his works in Sumerian. That was standard.
There was a lot of Sumerian Acadian bilingualism, but
then later Amorites came from the West and they
spoke a different form of Semitic language and they
too integrated into the culture. And so you have
families where even the children's names are in two
different languages, which suggests that the family was bilingual,
that they have an Amor right name and an
Acadian name with among the Children. Um Then there's
a group called the CASS sites who very frustratingly
because uh they're fascinating the CASS sites, but they
almost never wrote their own language down. They, they
adopted Acadian when they arrived they kept CASS site
names. There are a few Cassi terms. There's some,
but, but it's very hard to tell what language
group CASS site might have been. And there's people
in the north of Syria who spoke a language
called Huron, which was completely unrelated to the Semitic
languages or Sumerian. It's just a big mass of
languages and the people are in contact with one
another throughout the eras. And so one thing that's
always fascinated me is the the role of translation
and of bilingualism and of um of this really
rich contract contact and uh and interaction between the
cultures.
A and also, I mean, when it comes to
social relations, of course, people were in contact with
these other peoples that have other ethnic identities and
spoke others at least slightly different languages. But it
was not uh I mean, in terms of uh
uh social cohesion that didn't have a very big
impact. As for example, we unfortunately, unfortunately, nowadays would
hear first from certain politicians that open borders policies
are a disaster or something
they had um they did, they did get along
fine. Uh Most of the time, I think uh
there's a few sort of differences in terms of,
of today. Of course, there's a lot of difference
and I should say the languages were not just
slightly different, completely different. The horn hit Acadian and
Sumerian were completely different language families. So unlike if
you think about the European languages most of which
is are, are currently Indo European and so Spanish
Portuguese can sort of understand one another. HN hit
Sumerian and Acadian absolutely differently structured, different tense. Uh
YOU know, the the case endings, everything is completely
different and yet they did find ways to communicate.
One of the reasons for this openness was that
Mesopotamia's natural resources were limited. They were very rich
in terms of the agricultural land. They were very
rich in terms of um sheep. They had a
lot of sheep and goats and so they could
produce textiles, but things like mineral ores, stone, building,
um building stone wood for building, all of these
had to come from somewhere else. And that meant
they were looking outwards from the very beginning, they
were in contact with regions they wanted to trade
with. And so a lot of the early interactions
were not antagonistic. They seem to have been um
trade related and trying to get goods that were
needed in Mesopotamia and the Mesopotamians in turn trading
into other regions. There were times though when they
had antagonisms and at those times, for example, there
was a point at which the uh there was
a wall built to keep out the Amorites um
was completely ineffective. But it was uh the in
the, in the time of the third dynasty of
or around 2000 BCE or so, they were building,
you know, there was a king who was very
proud of having built this wall to keep the
Amorites out. So that suggests an antagonism that was
in a way somewhat fabricated because Emirates were already
living in Mesopotamia and they were completely integrated into
the society. But there was this perception at various
times that there was an enemy to be kept
out. Um BUT that's not the majority of these
interactions. I think the majority of the interactions were
um much more peaceful and much more um trade
related.
Mhm And of course, it's not to say that
there's never, I mean, tensions between people that come
from different cultural backgrounds. But also it's not necessarily
the case that just because they have to interact
with one another society just uh falls into complete
chaos.
No. And a lot of the wars were not
between people who have different ethnicities. A lot of
the wars were between people who spoke the same
languages. And so I don't think it was a
dividing line. I think there's when they were first
writing about the Sumerians and this is the early
20th century, there was a perception and you still
find this in textbooks that the Sumerians were attacked
from outside by the Acadians, by Sargon of Aca
who came in with different technology in a different
language and the Acadians conquered the Sumerians there. Yes,
he was an Acadian speaker. Yes, absolutely. But it
was not perceived at that time at all as
an invasion of foreigners coming into Suma. Um HE
did conquer parts of Suma and um and imposed
his, his government there. But as I say, the
Sumerians and Acadians had been in contact and been
living right next to one another in the same
cities forever. There'd been Sumerians living in Acadian cities
and Acadians living in Acadian speakers living in Sumerian
cities long before Sargon. So it wasn't sort of
the arrival of these unknown outsiders. It was, it
was a, a power hungry king who wanted to
build an empire. But uh it wasn't a sort
of ethnic conflict
and also something that you referred to briefly there.
In one of my previous questions was uh the
fact that there were also trade relations. And so
merchants also played an important role when it came
to the social dynamics, let's say, and the way
that people, different peoples related to one another.
Yes. Yes, they're fascinating. The merchants really interesting. Um
The uh one of the books that I wrote
a few years ago called Brotherhood of Kings. A
big section of it is about trade. It's also
about diplomacy. But, but the trade is really interesting
because you have trade connections as early as 2300
BC, all the way to the Indus Valley, all
the way to um they were trading with what
is now Bahrain, they were trading with what is
now Oman. And they were, these were regular merchants
going back and forth between these regions by boat
over hundreds of miles. And then later in the
19th to the 18th centuries, especially BCE, there were
traders from Mesopotamia, trading all the way into what
is now Turkey. And um again, hundreds of miles,
this time overland, taking goods in both directions, living
peacefully with the people in those regions, setting up
um what are called colonies, although it's not really
the right term uh trading colonies where they would
live within a city in a sort of community
of Assyrians living in this community. And this is
long before Syria was a imperialistic power. This is
a very small town really called Assyria that had
traders. Um There was uh there was trade over,
over land that came all the way from what
is now Afghanistan bringing Lapis Lazily, just an enormous
amount of movement of goods at a time when
I think it's people think of the Silk Road
as being the founder of this. But this was
long before the Silk Road and yet those same
routes were being used so much earlier to bring
many of the same goods in each direction.
So let's focus now a little bit on the
second millennium BC, which is a period that you
focused some of your work on and the early
old Babylonian period and Hammurabi's reign. So um wh
who was Hammurabi actually at what would you say
characterized this reign particularly when it came to war
and diplomacy between states?
Yes, Hammurabi was the king of Babylon, he came
to power in 1792 using the traditional um chronology,
1792 BC. And he was initially not an important
king. Uh His, it was a time when there
were a number of kingdoms in Mesopotamia, sort of
territorial states that were um centered on a particular
capital city. And there was a very powerful king
in the north of Mesopotamia, whose name was Shamshi
ADAD, who ruled a large area of what is
now Syria and northern Iraq. Um There was a
king in the south named Rim Sin who ruled
a very major kingdom called Larsa. And there was
a king also in the region of Elam, which
is now um uh Iran and Ham Rai was
just one of these kings. There were a number
of other ones as well over the course of
his reign. He had a very long reign. He
ruled for 43 years and for the 1st 30
years of his reign, he was not a big
important person um in terms of the the regional
dynamics, but uh he became more militaristic actually when
there was an attack from Elam on the region
of uh his region and also the region known
as Esa. And then there were various alliances formed.
And again, when you talk about diplomacy, his diplomacy
at this point was more to create a united
front against Elam. So there was diplomatic engagement among
the the states in Mesopotamia, including a state called
Mai, which was in the north. And these they
united, they were able to, to fight off the
elites. And something happened abe around them where he
became, instead of someone who was just defending his
kingdom, he seems to have turned around and become
much more interested in conquering himself and, and conquering
the neighbors. So he himself becomes a conqueror who
instead of now working with these allies that he'd
had, he turned against them. So he turned against
Larsa. The king of Larsa. Rim Sin was very
elderly. He ruled for about 60 years and his
kingdom was conquered and then Hammurabi turns around and
he he fights to the north and he managed
also to take over the region of Mai, which
had been one of his allies previously. So that
by the time he died, he had an empire
that extended from the Gulf up to what is
approximately the border of Syria today with, with Iraq
a little bit beyond. And it was a big
kingdom. It was an empire. We call it an
empire because it's traditionally called Hammurabi's empire. But there
are scholars who would argue it wasn't really an
empire, but it was a big kingdom and he
had conquered it and he had brought it under
his control. And he seems to have been pretty
successful at ruling such a big region during his
reign as soon as he died. And his son
took over Samso Luna in 1750 1749. Um Samso
Luna was much less successful at maintaining the southern
part so that he lost the southern part of
the empire. He does though seem to have extended
it somewhat further to the north. Um This, this
uh what's called the first dynasty of Babylon Hammurabi
founded it and it had collapsed by 1595. So
about 200 years of is considered the the first
dynasty of, of Babylon.
So on the question of Babylon having been an
empire, I would like to ask you here a
broader question. So as an historian, what would be
your reply to a question? Like what is an
empire? I mean, what is an empire actually?
Yes, an empire. If you think about it being
um uh a state that is multi, it, it
it would consist of more than one nation, of
course, at this point, they're not really thinking of
nations. But if you think of a, of a,
of a group of people who identify through a
shared language, maybe through a shared culture, an empire
tends to include a number of different groups like
that, who are Multilingual and who previously were independent
and they are being ruled by a single um
government that is, is not uh local to their
region. And in that way, I think Hammurabi is
an empire in that he was certainly ruling over
people who had previously been independent and who spoke
languages other than Acadian um but there's lots of,
I mean, there's so much discussion about what constitutes
an empire and especially when you look at modern
history and, and there are scholars who will say
the first real empire was the Neo Assyrian empire,
which was indeed a mesopotamian empire, but it wasn't
founded until the 10th century BC. Um And even,
and some would say later than the 10th, late
10th, 8 8th century BC when kings developed the
whole mechanism for maintaining an empire, because it's one
thing to conquer it. But then it's another thing
to have this uh the roads that you need
to build the garrisons, you need to set up
the standing army in order to maintain it, the
regular system of, of taxes, the regular system of
um getting messages across the empire easily. That structure
didn't develop in Hammurabi's time. So if, if that's
the definition of an empire, then his wouldn't be
an empire and having provinces and so forth, you
know, provinces and governors, all of those sorts of
things that developed with empire.
And of course, I ask you that question, not
because I want a, a definitive answer to it,
but I uh because it is a very interesting
and intellectually stimulating question also because I mean, uh
you can, you might say that what we mean
by an empire, a nation, a kingdom, a country,
I mean, these are at the end of the
day, I guess, useful constructs that historians, archaeologists and
other kinds of people use, but they are just
constructs, they are what they are. But uh also,
I mean, uh what we understand by them is
sometimes might have implications for people's lives. Like, for
example, the more recent uh concept of nations that
we've had since the 18th 19th century, right, which
was, which is a new concept of nation that
didn't exist, it didn't exist previously in history. So,
I mean, there, there's also always these uh very
interesting questions and I'm not sure to what extent
you agree with me. When I say that perhaps
they are useful constructs. At the end of the
day, there are constructs, but still they might have
some implications as to how people relate to one
another and so on.
I agree, I think they are um I think
one very interesting thing to look at is how
the ancients define things themselves. And of course, they
didn't have a word for empire. Uh They the
first king to think of having an empire was
Sargon who I mentioned before, Saron Aha. And well,
actually he's not the first one to think of
it. There was a king before him called Luke
Alag, who came up with the idea but didn't
actually manage to build an empire. But the idea
of being king of the whole world, that was
his sort of goal. I want to be king
of the whole world. I'm going to rule from
the lower sea to the upper sea. And that's
from the Gulf to the Mediterranean. Now, look, Azeez,
he didn't manage it at all. But Sargon who
came after him did apparently manage to conquer the
region from the Gulf, maybe to the Mediterranean, probably
not. But he, he, he tried very hard to
conquer the world as he saw it. So he,
he's creating the idea of a single person being
in charge of everything, which is an insane idea.
If you think about it, I mean, just before
this, you'd had kings of little city states and,
and maybe leagues of city states. But this, I
am going to rule the world becomes something that
then becomes an idea that later kings have as
an aspiration because they remember Sargon, he wasn't forgotten.
And so Hammurabi clearly must have had Sargon in
the back of his head. I want to do
Sargon, I want, I want to conquer from the
lower seat to the upper seat. I want to
rule the world. And again, later with the Assyrians.
And after that, once you have a tradition of
empire, it doesn't ever go away. Once you have
that um um crazy sort of thought the Assyrians,
then the Neo Babylonians and then the Aids and,
and the hellenistic Greeks and on and on and
on this, this idea that one could, that one
man could rule the world and it does tend
to focus on an emperor. It tends to be
an imperial project that has a person at the
top. Um And then you think about so their
perception was not, I'm going to build an empire
because they didn't have the word empire. It was,
I'm going to rule the world, you know, which
is even crazier. But I think that these using
their, their conceptions of things and then comparing them
with what we do, um as historians is useful,
not just in terms of empire. I find it
very interesting in terms of religion too, which is
a topic that is completely separate, but they had
no word for religion. And when we try to
put their religion into a modern box, it just
doesn't work. It is just, and there are some
people who would say we shouldn't use the word
religion for what the mesopotamians practiced because it didn't
have a holy book. It didn't, wasn't dogmatic. It
didn't have, I mean, there were so many things
that we think of as part of religion that
we're not part of their religion did, didn't have
a claim on truth. There was no sort of,
we have the true religion and you have a
false religion. All of that is different. And so
I think by looking at it through their eyes,
sometimes it gives us insights that we don't get
if we try and categorize it using our own
terms. Do you see?
No, that, that's very interesting. And actually I've already
talked on the show with people. I, I don't
know if, if they would identify necessarily as historians,
but they did the historical work and they would
be people that you would probably classify as postmodernists
in terms of their way of approaching things. And
for example, when it came to Ancient Greece, uh
one of those people told me that, for example,
we now talk about the economy, but the Greek
didn't have a concept like the economy and many
other concepts that we now use nowadays that, that
we use nowadays, they wouldn't happen. So perhaps even,
even though it might be a little bit postmodernist,
it would still be true that when looking back
in history across different civilizations, kingdoms, empires, where we
have to keep in mind that probably many of
our modern concepts wouldn't apply to them and would
pro we should probably uh analyze their life, ways,
their institutions and so on with that in mind.
I think that's right. And I think that I
think theories are fascinating, you know, trying to decide
who is in a chiefdom and who is in
a kingdom and these sorts of things. It's fascinating
work. But I don't think it necessarily is always
true to the culture you're studying because perhaps they
developed in a different way from the way that
the theorists have developed, looking at other cultures. And
so I think having an open mind about it
and not necessarily always wanting to um feel like,
OK, we've defined this as an empire and therefore
now we can move on. I think that there's,
there's a real strength and importance in scholarship to
uh being aware that our own contracts, as you
say are constructs and that they are not necessarily
written in stone and, and don't always um appear
as one might expect in a culture that you're
studying.
So another very interesting thing about the reign of
Amur Abi was his code. I mean, the the
still of Amur Abi, I is very well known.
I mean, I I actually studied dentistry in university
and even in dentistry, I have a course on
the history of medicine and dental medicine and the
code of Abu Dhabi was mentioned there. So, so
apparently everything was there.
Yeah. No, he, he has dentists in there is
true. Removing teeth. Yeah, that's true. Oh His, his
uh laws are fascinating. They, they were not the
first laws. He was certainly not the first law
giver. Uh THE hundreds of years before this kings
had promulgated their laws. Hammurabi by putting his on
a big stone Steele, as you say, in fact,
a number of big stone Steelers, but only one
of them has been found. We know there were
others and when that was found in 1902, it
was found not in Babylon, it was found in
Sousa where it had been captured by an earlier
king and taken as, as spoils of war and
so it was found in Souza and it's so
dramatic. It's, it's now in the Louver Museum and
you, it's 7 ft tall and it's a beautiful
diorite sculpture with um the sculpture of Hammurabi at
the top and then all the laws on the,
on the lower part of it. And it's a
really important historical document because it's so complete. It's
so um um fascinating in terms of what it
tells us about the culture. What's interesting is it's
not what most people think it is. It's not
the first laws that was long before. Um It's
the best preserved early law collection. Absolutely. Uh But
Hammurabi was not inventing law and interestingly, even though
the laws were put out in a public place,
they had them set up in the city where
people could see them, most people were not literate.
A vast majority of people were not literate.
I was going to ask you that if just
common people could read it or
by Hammurabi's time, there was more literacy than there
had been previously, but it still wasn't common that
the average person wouldn't be able to read and
write. And um so they were up there and
they were also written in a very archaic script.
It's as though uh we were to put up
a, a monument today and use it in the
script of the Gutenberg Bible. Most people wouldn't be
able to read it even if they could read
you know. And so he put it in this
archaic script and it's one would have thought that
judges would consult the laws in order to come
up with their judgments. But curiously, there's no evidence
that they did. So, even though these laws existed,
the legal system, which had also existed for hundreds
and hundreds of years, seems to have worked fairly
independently of the laws in that the, the, the
judges clearly had a sense of what was right
or wrong. They made decisions that are similar to
what's in the, the code, but doesn't follow it
to the letter. And they seem to have been
viewed much more as a set of legal precedents
that the judges might have consulted sometimes and sometimes
they didn't and they probably were indeed legal precedents
that Hammurabi didn't sort of pull them out of,
out of, um, out of his head that they
were examples of court cases that had happened, that
decisions had been made. And these, um, these legal
precedents he then collected and put it up in,
in a public place and most of them aren't
about crime at all. Most of them are about
things like divorce and inheritance and property ownership and
maintaining your fields and paying your taxes and, um,
what things should cost and, and as you say,
dentistry, you know, how much should a, should a
physician charge for taking out a tooth or whatever?
That's the kind of thing that the laws are
so important for, because they tell us so much
about daily life about what people cared about and
what, what happened in the society.
So talking a little bit more about daily life
and before we get into the Kingdom of Hannah,
uh we have this very common idea that the
ancient world was terribly violent. I mean, it was,
there was violence on the street every day, every
time. Um, BUT what do we actually know about
the prevalence of violence in mesopotamian society? I mean,
was violence commonplace or was society mostly peaceful?
Yeah, this is always a surprise for my students
that they assumed that it was a long time
ago. So it must have been very violent and
it really wasn't the average person living their life
in a city didn't encounter violence unless they were
called up to go to war. Really. Um, THE,
there wasn't much random violence that we see and
we know this because court cases survive. So there
are court records and there are the laws as
well, but there are certainly laws, you know, if
a man hits another man, that kind of thing.
And so people did hit one another but, uh,
the extent to which this was a prevailing problem
in a city seems to have been really small
that people lived in communities within the city that
were generally full of neighbors who they were related
to either by marriage or by, um, by birth.
That people tended to live in the same house
for generations. You knew all your neighbors, there was,
um, people had professions, they owned farms that were
outside in the fields, beyond the city. Their lives
were remarkably peaceful. For the most part, if a
city was attacked, which happened periodically, I think one
gets the sense because we tend to compress 3000
years of history into one chapter. Sounds though they're
at war all the time, but they weren't, they
really weren't. If, if your city was besieged. Yes,
you had difficulties, obviously, because you um had to
survive without you try what we surviving on the
food and water that was available in the city,
that sort of thing. But even then when the
city was conquered, at least in the second millennium,
it became much more violent in the first millennium,
I think. But in the second millennium, BC, there's
not much evidence of, of kings coming in and
having their troops kill everyone in sight. That wasn't
the case. They, they, nobody benefited from that. And
weirdly even on the battlefield, there is plenty of
evidence that soldiers were more valuable if they were
caught alive and held for ransom than if they
were killed. So there are some of the laws
in of Hammurabi, in fact refer to this situation,
if a soldier has then gone on campaign and
he's been taken captive and he's held for ransom.
There's a whole bunch of laws about how the,
how his ransom is going to be paid, his
family will pay it, family can't afford it. Then
his, um uh you know, the, the various stages
of first the temple and then perhaps even the
king would pay his ransom. But the assumption was
that he would be ransomed and therefore the people
who've taken him captive, I mean, they stand to
benefit, right? So, although there are records of a
lot of people dying in wars and the kings
brag about how many um burial mounds that they
had to, to build for the dead of the
enemy or whatever when it comes down to it,
it really does seem as though the extent to
which violence intruded on people's lives was relatively limited
and that when it did happen, it was, it
was dramatic and, and feared, obviously,
I would imagine that when it comes to this
type of question, something that people do not usually
consider is the fact that even if people by
then were already living in, what by their standards
were big cities with thousands of people, not no
longer the 150 people in the hunter gatherer societies
or something like that, the people in their own
families and their immediate communities, they can more or
less regulate the behavior of the members of their
communities. Right? I mean, it's not because perhaps they
didn't have the police back then that it's all
just a chaos, a chaos. All the time. Right.
Yeah.
No, it wasn't a chaos all the time at
all. And I do think there was a lot
of social pressure to follow the norms of behavior
and they were pretty strict in terms of how
you behaved and what was expected. And so when
people went to court, um, for example, if classic
court case, um, uh, a woman died without having
Children and her dowry is supposed to revert to
her, her husband, not her husband, supposed to revert
to her father or to her brothers because it
doesn't belong to her husband. This kind of thing
where you could imagine them getting into fights or
so forth. They always went to court. They were
very, very, um interested in the judicial process and
they wanted it to work. And it does seem
as though people rarely took things into their own
hands, they would go to court. There were judges,
there were witnesses and very importantly, there was an
oath that you had to swear. And this, I
think is really a crucial part. And again, it
goes back to their religion, you were asked to
swear an oath in front of the image of
the God or the symbol of the God that
you were telling the truth. So for example, if
in this hypothetical case where the, the brothers want
to get back the, the land from the, the
husband, um, they will go and swear an oath
that indeed they remember that their, their sister got
the dowry from her father and that they were
there and that the dowry was hers and therefore
it should revert to them. And if they swore
that in front of the gods, that was a
deciding factor because they so deeply believed in the
gods that someone being willing to swear an oath
was considered to be evidence that they were telling
the truth. And there's evidence that people were so
unwilling to, to lie in front of the gods
that there were decisions made on that basis as
well. If someone says, um this man stole from
me and they said, well, go and swear to
the gods that this is stolen, they would often
go actually, no, I'm not going to swear that
oath. And then it was decided that clearly that,
that the goods hadn't been stolen because he the,
the person making the claim wasn't willing to swear.
So for those reasons, and I think also because
of this sense that the gods were watching, especially
the God Shamash and they wanted to not to
be punished by Shamash. But there was a, there
was a surprisingly law-abiding feel to the cities that
um in a sense that you were, you don't
want to let down your family and your um
your household by doing something that would be uh
violent or illegal.
So another thing about Mesopotamian society, I would like
to ask you is uh I'm I'm very interested
in always when I talk with historians, for example,
about hearing about uh gender relations and things related
to that. So, what was the role of men
in Mesopotamia? Was Mesopotamian civilization, patriarchal. And even if
it was patriarchal, what were women allowed to do?
I mean, I, I'm not sure if at this
point we can talk about rights because they wouldn't
have had that concept probably as, at least as
we understand it today. But, um, what do we
know about that?
Oh, so much. And I'm so glad you asked.
Yes, it was a patriarchal society. Absolutely. Um, MEN
were the head of the household but women had
enormous amount of agency to use a, a sort
of term that we use today. There were women
in all sorts of different professions. There were women
who had leadership roles, women were allowed to take
someone to court. They could be witnesses in court,
they could give loans to other people. They could,
um, go to court to get the loan repaid.
Um, THEY owned their own property that was given
to them as a dowry by their fathers when
they got married. That was theirs. It didn't become
community property. It didn't belong to their husbands. Uh,
THEY could pass it on to their Children, including
their daughters. They were, uh, they were free to
move about in society. They were not kept at
home in, like, in ancient Greek times at certain
periods uh they had, they, even in a patriarchal
society, there is no shortage of evidence for women.
And this is something actually that I focused in
the book that you mentioned. Weaver describes in kings.
It's a, it's a book in which I used
a lot of small biographies to kind of build
up a history of the whole period. And I
found that I, I right from the beginning wanted
to have women in the book. But it was
obvious that one couldn't write this book without women
because there were so many important roles that women
played. I talked about the textile industry, which was
the textiles made by the palace or made by
the temple. The vast majority of people who did
the spinning and the weaving were women and they
were highly highly skilled professional women who were making
textiles that were so valuable that they were traded
for gold and for silver from other lands really
um important role in the economy. There, there were
priestesses who had positions that were just as important
as a high priest, if not, sometimes more so
um who were uh so important when they were
put into place in in, they were uh um
introduced into their position as high priestess that the
name of the year that year would be named
after that position being filled. Uh There were queens
who interacted diplomatically with other queens in other regions
that they very early on. One of the very
earliest uh archives found in Mesopotamia is the archive
of the queen named Baron am Tara who was,
she had her own palace. She was married to
the king and the king was in charge of
the kingdom. But she had a uh an entire
temple estate with fields and sheep and fisheries and
hundreds of workers and textile. Um AND that she
was in charge of it. So it was not
that she was doing it for her husband. It
was, it was her domain. And we know about
her much more than we know about her husband
actually because his palace wasn't excavated. So I think
what's what's fascinating to see is that one can
look at gender relations in in depth and to
see that at this very, very early stage, there
was no sense among the mesopotamians that women couldn't
do things. There was no sense of women being
inadequate, which I think is really fascinating even though
men were running the place, they weren't. I mean
running like a king in charge of a kingdom.
Um His, one of his chief advisor was usually
his wife. And in many cases, many, for example,
the Kingdom of Ebla, the royal couple were considered
to be joint rulers, they were, they ruled together.
So women were taken terribly seriously and and um
exercised all kinds of um um what's the time
I'm going for here? I was gonna say rights,
but you're right in a way it isn't because
they haven't developed the idea of rights, but they
had societal permission and um and capacity to do
all sorts of interesting things. There were female scribes.
Most scribes were not female, but there were some,
there were women who were physicians again outnumbered by
the men, but one could become a physician. There
were women in many, many interesting positions including even
surprisingly um bricklayers uh people and the chief of
some of the bricklayers was a woman and the
there were women doing bricklaying. So some even of
the manual labor that one would assume was entirely
male. Well, not so,
and this is incredibly interesting because I mean, many
times, we tend to have that simplistic idea that
perhaps how uh men in the 19th century in
Europe and America fought about women that they were
inferior beings and they were emotional and they should
be conscripted to domestic labor and stuff like that.
I, I mean, people perhaps in some ancient civilizations
in some traditional societies like hunter gatherers, sometimes I
talk on the show with anthropologists about that. Uh
PERHAPS they are not so backwards if we are
allowed to use that term here when it comes
to gender relations. And uh and they don't have
the those sorts of ideas when it comes to
women and their importance and what they can do
what they are allowed to do and so on.
I think you're right. And I think when you
look at what was being written in the 19th
century. There was often an assumption that, well, it's
ancient. So they must have had these norms, the
women must have been kept at home, they must
have been considered inferior. And then when you actually
go and look at the texts that's not there.
That is um one of these modern suppositions. And
I think it partly it comes out of the,
the model of progress, you know, this idea that
history is a history of progress from a barbarous
beginning to a civilized present. And it's just not
true when you come to many aspects actually of
society where there've been ups and downs throughout, throughout
history and very early on women had much more
of a role in public life in early sumer
than was true even um by the Neo Babylonian
period, for example. So within the same culture, you
actually see women losing in a way some of
their public role uh by that time. And even
then, even in the Neo Babylonian period, there was
still plenty of women doing um running businesses and,
and uh and being priestesses and so forth. So
yes, I agree. I, I think that, that we
have assumptions that as if it was somehow innate
to humans and I don't think it is innate
to humans to treat women badly. I, I think
that there is, is a quite an inspiring aspect
to this, which is that even in a patriarchal,
very early culture. There are plenty of places where
women had um had a, a equal standing in
some ways in society. And I think one of
course reasons why they, it wasn't a matriarchy and
why matriarchy are so hard to find is that
biologically women have babies and that is going to
curtail the amount that they can actually do out
in the, in the, in the big world. If
you're having eight Children that it's, it's going to
be a lot of pregnancy and a lot of
childbearing. One really interesting group in, in Mesopotamia, in
that same time of Hammurabi were a group of
women who were called the mediums and they were
dedicated to the gods or each one was dedicated
to a particular God of Shamash, the Sun God,
but sometimes Murdoch, the God of Babylon, they weren't
allowed to marry. Uh THEY didn't have biological Children
and they became enormously influential business women who were
making loans and buying property and sending trade expeditions
and all kinds of things. So it really gives
you a sense that it perhaps is this distinction
between the women who were having babies and the
women who weren't having babies and the women who
weren't having babies, nothing was stopping them from doing
basically the same things that men did in terms
of their business acumen.
Yes, I, I think that the most interesting uh
thing or things to look into when we, I
mean, are looking into ancient societies, historical societies, and
also, again, traditional contemporary societies is to look into
um social structure, social organization, uh economic, uh how
the economy is structured uh ecological factors. Because that's
actually what is most interesting when understand or trying
to understand where uh gender relations, the sexual division
of labor and so on comes from. And not
so much trying to come up with an idea
of what a supposed human nature is like or
should be like and then creating this sort of,
I don't know, stereotypes or even archetypes of what
a woman or a man is or should be
that are supposedly very ancient and universal and should
last forever. Right.
Right. And as I say, I mean, one universal
is obviously that, that women do have Children and
that is something that has, has obviously had an
impact throughout human history. And I'm in saying women
who had babies, obviously one needs women to have
babies. I mean, the one doesn't have any, any
continuation of the human race unless, unless babies being
had. But I do think it's interesting how, um
even in that, even among women who were mothers,
there were plenty of things that they were still
actively involved in, but it does, uh it, it
does sort of explain how you have both patriarchy
and at the same time, a culture in which
women had plenty of um positions they could hold.
Yeah.
And so you've also done work on specifically the
Kingdom of Ha. So, I mean, tell us about
it and the city of Turk as well. Uh
I mean, uh tell us about them and also
why did you get interested in the Kingdom of
Ha specifically? I mean, is, is there something special
about it or was it for some other reason?
It is, it's special but, but it was for
a very prag pragmatic reason, which is that my
doctoral advisor, um Giorgio Boat, he was excavating at
Tarka. And when I was choosing my dissertation topic,
it made sense to do something connected with the
excavation that I was able to work on. So
I did go on to the excavation and um
and worked there for just one season actually. But
it was absolutely an incredible experience, really fascinating. And
what I got interested in was that the um
the the site of TKA was it was it
was occupied for a very long period of time.
But the, the eras that are well represented from
the excavations there extend from about the end of
Hammurabi's reign to the period covered by the the
excavations maybe 1700 BCE. So it's a fairly short
period of time that um no, I'm sorry, maybe
uh it's later than that um 1600 BCE. So
about 100 150 years of represented by the the
actual excavations there. What was fascinating to me was
that we were finding Ka form tablets in private
houses, which was really interesting because of course, then
you have private archives, you have people and this,
this what I was talking about about neighborhoods within
cities. You have a whole neighborhood that literally we
can see in the ground because it's being excavated.
And then the, the documents from the houses there
tell you who lived in them, who was working
there, what their professions were, how they were related
to one another, brothers living next door to brothers.
All of this sort of wonderful, fascinating stuff about
a community. All right. So before the excavation started
at Turka, they started in 1976 in the decades.
Previous to that, a bunch of documents had been
found and, and, and uh acquired by museums around
the world that clearly came from the same site.
They have all of the same characteristics and in
fact, they even name some of the same people.
So what I decided I was going to do
was to get those tablets that were from pre
previous to the excavation. There's about 16 of them
and look at them and, and put them in
the context of the documents that came from the
excavation in the end. What I ended up doing
instead, that was my plan. What I ended up
doing instead was figuring out the chronology of the
kingdom because until I could know what the dates
on those documents meant, I couldn't really deal with
them as a corpus. And so what I thought
was going to be the first chapter of my
dissertation as a doctoral student, ended up being the
whole thing, it was about the chronology of, of
the kingdom. And then I ended up that more
evidence came out later. And I didn't actually publish
the book about that until 2002. But the uh
the chronology became the thing I was really interested
in. But then when I published my book, I
also included those, those tablets that previously had been
in uh collections around the world that needed to
be put together. So that was how I got
interested. But it is a fascinating place because Turka
was home to a kingdom. It's often called a
small inconsequential kingdom. I don't think it was, I
think it will turn out to be quite important,
but it's called Hanna the Kingdom. And it was
a kingdom which remarkably survived over 500 years and
in the same general area and with the same
um scribal practices. And this is what was so
interesting is that you can identify Hanna texts by
the way, the scribes wrote them, wrote the tablets
and by the particular terms and, and phrases and
um and, and various quirks of of the tablets.
So it, the tablets cover then a period from
around 1720 ish all the way up to the
12th century. I mean, really late. There are han
attacks from the 11 hundreds. And that means that
we have AAA sequence of kings of this region
that covers such a long period of time that
it actually becomes more important than just being this
one kingdom. It helps us understand more about the
chronology of that whole period.
And then a very interesting thing that happens between
1595 and 1450 BC is what people call the
one the 100 years long, dark age uh where
few records were kept and what happened then basically,
do we know that? No,
we, we, we really don't know very much. In
1595 the first dynasty of Babylon came to an
end and the last king Sam Suan was deposed
or he, he lost his throne. And then this,
we call it a dark age because it's just
people stopped writing. Apparently there are no can form
documents found from most of Mesopotamia for as you
say, 100 years by about 1500 you begin to
get some. So not much until 1450 as you
say, but around 1500 there are some what was
going on. We really don't know by the time
the, the sort of the mist dissolves and we
begin to get texts again. There's a new dynasty
in Babylon of dynasty who are Cassy in origin.
Where did these CASS sites come from? It's a
fascinating question. There's a whole new kingdom in northern
Mesopotamia called Mitani. Where did it come from? Who
were its kings? How did they get into power?
Um There's a lot of changes that have taken
place but this dark age in the sense that
we don't have any documents that that really tell
us what was happening is, is fascinating and frustrating
as historians because of course, we went to what
were the origins of the CASS sites? How did
they come to take the throne? How did the
the meal um Kingdom develop? How did it spread?
Part of this is just probably because we haven't
excavated the right places. Uh I suspect that there
are tablets that are yet to be found that
will tell us we'll answer some of these. But
one solution for a while was to say that
perhaps that is just a perhaps we're mistaken that
that was a century at all. There was a,
a movement for quite a while to um suggest
that in fact, we just had the dates wrong.
And in fact, what we think of as 1595
was perhaps maybe like 1495 and there was just
100 years missing because we had simply mis misjudged
the dates lately that has gone out of fashion.
And for a while I thought that was true.
Actually, I was, I was a proponent for what's
called the low chronology briefly, but what is now
called the middle chronology, which seems to be the
accurate one. Is it, it, it holds up and
it does retain this dark age. But there are
two kingdoms that do seem to have continued to
produce documents. One is called the Sea Land which
is in the south uh the region around the
city of or and south of there uh where
there seems to have been AAA thriving, we know
there was a thriving uh kingdom because a number
of cities from that kingdom have been, have been
excavated and discovered recently that continued into the the
missing century. And then also probably the the tablets
from TKA do too. So the Hana tablets do.
The problem is, is we don't have enough of
them yet. We have this really fascinating thing which
is that there's a series of kings call, who
call themselves king of the land of Ghana. And
they had beautiful cylinder seals and there are tablets
from their re that suggest that they were powerful
kings and that they ruled this region. But for
each of the kings, there's maybe one or two
tablets and that's not enough to build a, a
history on. And so placing them chronologically is really
been challenging. And when I first was working on
them, I was pretty sure they those kings bridged
the gap between um 1595 and 1500 the 16th
century. But I no longer think that's true. I
think there's they are later. And that means that
perhaps Conor still doesn't have tablets from that period,
which would be very frustrating but we have to,
we have to wait, I think there's, there are
some tablets that are still going to be published
that would be very interesting to see that were
excavated. Um And those may have some answers and
perhaps when excavations re restart in Syria, after the
um the the difficulties there and perhaps more will
be found. But it's, I think Hannah holds a
key but it's not clear 100% yet. What that
key is,
you know, this is one of the things that
I really love in my conversations with people who
do work on ancient history and with paleoanthropologists, for
example, and archaeologists, because it's like we have a
sort of an idea of a puzzle in our
minds with the sort of limited information we have
available limited resources, the excavations that people have done
and we are limited to that. But then perhaps
over time as we excavate more places and find
new things, the puzzles and changes and then there
are more missing pieces and then we get a
few more pieces, but we're never 100% sure what
the, what are the missing pieces and what will
the final puzzle look like?
Oh, very much. Yeah. It's exactly that I, I,
there was a, um, a scholar who described it
as if you imagine an ocean and there are
little islands in the ocean and the islands are
the parts we know and the ocean, which is,
is unfamiliar. It's like there are, there are mountains
under the ocean, but we, we can't see them
yet. And I feel that way very much about
mesopotamian history because there are these little bits that
we know really well. So for example, the, the
city of Mai, which I talked about, the city
of Mari, um excavations were done there and they
found a massive archive and it only covers 13
years of history, but there's tens of thousands of
documents. And so for that 13 years, we can
say so much about that one little kingdom under
one little King Zimri Lim. But the his contemporaries,
the people who were ruling with him, even Hammurabi,
his palace hasn't been excavated. So we don't know,
we don't have his archive. There must have been
so much more and maybe there is still so
much more to be found. But we can say
a lot about a number of things. And then
we have to sometimes say, we just don't know.
And with the 16th century, it's, it's one of
those, we just don't know, it's something was happening
and by the end of it, things have changed,
but it would be so nice to know more.
So I would like to ask you now about
the importance of diplomacy during war specifically and how
the great powers from this period of time. And,
and now I'm going to focus mostly on the
late bronze age from 1595 up till around 1155
BC where in the near Eastern powers back then
were at war. And we have, for example, the
Caite Babylonians, the ides, the meals, the Egyptians and
other peoples at war. So um how was peace?
Uh FIRST of all, um I, I mean, how
did war look back then? Uh WHY were they
at war uh in that specific period of time
and, and how was peace achieved between them? Yeah.
Yeah. So we're coming out of the, you know,
we finish the, the, the dark age of the
16th century. And there are these kingdoms as you
say, that had established themselves. And there are four
major kingdoms at Cassa Babylonia, as you mentioned, Mitanni,
the Hittites in Anatolia and Egypt, those four powers.
And initially they weren't really in contact with one
another because they're very far away from one another.
But when they came into contact and when they
came into conflict was in the Northern Levant. So
in the region of Western Syria, there is um
an area that was, had particularly good ports. It
was an area of a lot of trade and
also in the region that was called Kuwana, which
is in the what later became called CIA um
in, in uh South southern Turkey. And this was
an area that three of the powers wanted control
of the Hittites wanted to control it. Mitani wanted
to control it and increasingly Egypt wanted to control
it as Well, so each one of these powers
is sending their forces into this region trying to
gain control of this trading hub region. And they
did, they, they fought one another. And we know
this, especially from Egyptian records where for example, Atom
the third sends troops up into Mitani, which the
Egyptians called. Naha was their name for it. And
he describes taking a lot of booty back to
um Egypt, all of these animals and riches and
so forth that he took back with him. But
he didn't manage to conquer Mitani at the time.
And what's interesting is that in his records, Tomos,
the third's records, he describes that embassies came with
tribute for Egypt from all of these foreign lands.
And he he names the foreign lands and they
are clearly some of these regions around the Mediterranean,
including um Babylonia, including perhaps Assyria at the time.
Uh Greece is mentioned, it seems so these were
people sending diplomats to Egypt after Egypt had had
had raided Mitani. Now, of course, from the Egyptian
perspective, they were just coming to bow down and
worship Thomas the third. But what he doesn't mention
is that there had been a for over 1000
years by this time, a tradition of diplomacy across
the Middle East, the non Egyptian Middle East in
which people sent one another gifts and they sent
one another ambassadors and they worked out terms of
interaction and peace that had existed at least since
the time of EBR in 2400 specie. So, what
it looks like was actually happening is ambassadors show
up in Egypt, like, oh, you're new on the
block. We don't know much about you. Um, YOU
have just made a raid into Mitani. We would
like peace with you because we'd rather you didn't
come and raid us. Here are some gifts, you
know, we would like some gifts back from you
and we sort of setting up some kind of
diplomatic relationship. This is me guessing that that's what's
going on. But I it looks right. Then later
he describes that the Chiefs of Mitani show up
in Egypt and he describes them begging for peace.
But the thing is, is that it's probably not
that um I am sorry, I'm getting my, my
Egyptian kings wrong. We have to get into Amman
at the second AM at the second. He's raiding
in this region. It's a hot, the second who
describes these meal coming and begging for peace. And
then in the ninth year of Amin at the
second, the wars stop. He's describes going out on
campaign into the Levant up until then in the
ninth year. No more of that. And it seems
as though peace breaks out between the great powers.
We don't have direct evidence until the time of
Amin Hotep the third and that was in the
13 nineties, uh E ce 13, eighties AM hut
the third in Egypt was clearly in a relationship
of peace and alliance with his, with the other
great powers around the region. We know this because
his letters survive and we have this incredible uh
collection of letters called the Amana letters found in
Egypt. They're all on clay tablets, they were thinking
in air form and what they show is that
the Egyptians had prior to the time, Bain H
at the third, adopted the whole diplomatic system that
had developed in Mesopotamia and become a part of
it. And so that, whereas previously, like in Hammurabi's
time, this kind of diplomacy happened quite locally between
uh other Mesopotamian kingdoms. By the 14th century, it
had extended from Egypt to Babylon to Mitani to
Hati. These great powers were um in a relationship
of diplomatic um um alliance and peace with one
another. And these letters show it very clearly and
they show us the mechanisms of how it worked.
And it was just the most fascinating period. I,
I find that era really striking because they didn't
even threaten one another in their letters. The letters
I, once when I was first studying them, I
read someone writing a long time ago who said
they're so boring. There's nothing about war, but that's
what makes them so fascinating. Right. There's no saber
rattling at all. They're not threatening each other. They
were sending gifts, they were sending envoys back and
forth. They married one another's daughters. They were um
absolutely aware of one another in terms of writing
these letters and they knew who all about one
another's courts. And they managed to maintain this pretty,
pretty consistently, not completely without um skirmishes, but for
200 years, almost this, this period of international diplomacy
continued,
uh which is really fascinating and, and probably something
that some of our contemporary politicians should learn from.
Right.
Well, I think that the difference back then, of
course, was that there was no single power that
was more powerful than the rest. All of them
were about equally matched and they couldn't, they had
real trouble fighting far away from their homeland. So
when Tamas the third did and am at the
second did try and campaign in uh the Middle
East, they were in the Levant, they were really
stretched thin. It was very expensive and they were
in regions that they didn't know well. And these
were, and they were facing well armed, um really
equally matched armies. And it seems as though they
all kind of realized that this was not going,
they were not going to be able to conquer,
he wasn't going to be able to conquer Mitani,
the, the Egyptian and the Malian king wasn't going
to be able to conquer Egypt and his I
king wasn't going to be able to conquer Babylon.
You know, this was just not going to happen.
And so by creating this peaceful relationship among themselves,
they benefited, they got lots of luxury goods that
they wouldn't have gotten otherwise. And they didn't have
to spend all that money on their wars. So,
it's a different time and I, I think that
very specific features of it maybe make it a
little bit hard to translate to the present. But
really interesting.
Yeah. But at least the part of reps in
corresponding with one another trying to come up with
peace terms instead of just talking about war and
being war. MERS. Oh,
absolutely. And they, and I think it's, it's really
interesting that Egypt was willing to buy into this
because the rest of the Middle East had had
this. So Babylon Mitani and Hay, they had known
about this diplomatic system and they had had moments
of these peaceful relationships before Egypt is so separate
from this, from the other cultures up until this
point and so very self-confident. I mean, the Egyptian
kings were gods for heaven's sake. You know, the
others weren't gods. But the fact that the Egyptians
were willing to sign on as, as they call
them brothers. So the, this whole sort of language
that they used, it was a brotherhood, they were
equals, they were all great kings and they were
brothers and in the beginnings of their letters, they
would lay this out to so and so my
brother, so and so that's so and so your
brother and then they would say, may your house
and your wives and your soldiers and your household
be well. And they all, they, they was, it
was a very um formulaic kind of uh in
the introduction to the letter. And then they had
to write an Acadian and the Egyptian scribes had
to learn Acadian in order to, had to learn
can form in order to write these letters. All
of this, the Egyptian kings were willing to do.
And it's rare for the Egyptian kings to say
anybody is their equal. You know, they're not, they're
not into being equals of someone. They, they're really,
really powerful and yet they did at this period
and they did recognize the equality of these other
kings.
So before we talk a little bit about the
legacy of Mesopotamia, I would like to ask you
a specific question about the economy in Mesopotamia. So
uh how did the relationships between, let's say the
Royals and the peasants looked like? I mean, was
this, how was the economy organized? Was it a
feudal system or what exactly?
No, it wasn't feudal. It, it varied in different
time periods. Um People always paid taxes that was
always part of the deal. Um Certain times the
kings would give out land. This was especially during
the late bronze age where we have land grants
to faithful civil servants. And what's interesting about them
is those initially was, were taken as some sort
of feudal system because it, it looks vaguely as
though it was um like the the system of
the European middle ages, but it really wasn't because
there is no requirement of the person receiving the
land to do anything in exchange. It's not, I
will give you this land and you will provide
me this many troops or something like that. It's
just I'm going to give you this land and
it does seem as though it was a reward
for loyal service, but very curiously, especially in Casa
Babylonia, there was a, there were statements in these
land grants that said this is for all time.
This is your land for all time. So it's
not as though the king couldn't, couldn't take it
back again, which makes it very, not very feudal.
You know, it has the king has very little.
Um um HE, he's sort of giving everything away
in an interesting way. Although there are letters that
survive that do kind of belie that where there's
a letter, for example, that was found in Newsy
where a king writes to a queen who he'd
given no sorry, he wrote to another vassal king.
And he said the land that I've given to
such and such a queen, I'm going to have
to take away from her and I'm going to
give it to another person. So it does seem
as though it wasn't quite as eternal as the
the records suggest. But at that particular time shows
a lot of engagement of the kings with their
subjects and with their civil servants that the king's
seal appears on a lot of documents. The king
is often described as being present for various um
actions. And this is true in Hati. It's true
in Ugari, which was in the Levant. It's true
in Hanna, in the text that I look at
um true in Babylonia in this late bronze age
period, they do seem to have been surprisingly engaged
with um with people not necessarily commoners. I don't
think we're looking at, at people who were very
poor, but certainly with more of their population, that
may have been true at other times.
And did the commoners have any idea of, for
example, who the king was or the Royals were
uh the royal family and so on then uh
if so, uh I mean, how did they relate
to their political leaders? Basically, how did they think
about them? Uh You've already mentioned uh if I
remember correctly that at least in Mesopotamia, in Egypt,
it was different. But in Mesopotamia, they didn't present
themselves or identify as gods, right? But yeah, yeah,
most of them. But, but, but apart from that,
I mean, how were the relations there? Basically,
one problem is that the commoners didn't write. Um
So we don't have documents written by them. It
would be lovely if they had, you know, if
we had a diary of a peasant, that would
be fantastic. So the ways they come up in
documents tend to be with relationship to the the
courts or to the temples. And at various times,
a lot of people worked for the court and
for the temple, especially for example, in the early
dynastic period and the third dynasty or which were
before Hammurabi's time, there were thousands of people who
worked for the the palaces and the temples and
their names would appear and they would receive rations.
And so we know from the ration texts and
from their description of their work that they were
closely tied to the, to the royal family or
to the palace. But that's of course, because we're
excavating in a capital city. And those are people
who are there, what the rural peasants thought, I
have no idea because we don't have any records
of them. We do know certain things though that
the kings did that made that perhaps it meant
that the peasants would know their names. And one
was that the dating system was based on the,
the year of the king. And so you had
the king's name in the year. So you you
might have the year in which the king did
build the great wall of Sar. And it might
be the year in which Hammurabi built the great
wall of Sar or something like that. So even
if you're naming a year, I was born in
the year Hammurabi built the wall of Sar, you're
remembering the king's name, that's one way. And later
they would just number the years. So they would
say the the 30th year of king. So and
so or whatever, but it still had the king's
name in it. That's one way the other I
do think is that this in the late bronze
age, there might have been quite a lot of
movement of the kings around their states. And we
see that because of the king's seal showing up
in so many documents. There's a debate about this
though, whether the king was actually there, if it
says that the king was there or was it
statue or was it someone representing him? If it
was him in person, it suggests that he did
quite a bit of traveling around his realm and
people might have had a chance to sort of
at least see the, the royal entourage going by.
Uh THAT'S unclear. Mhm
No, I, one of the reasons why I asked
you that question is because many times when I
think about uh how people lived back in uh
historical societies. II, I am also interested in trying
to understand how they would think about themselves in
relation to the place they lived in the country
or the nation they lived in, if they were
aware at all of the people who were basically
their political leaders and who they were, what they
did. Uh And, and, and also in comparison to
how we think about the places they lived in
nowadays because I, I don't know, II, I I'm
not, I don't know at all. For example, if
someone who lived in, what we now call France
in the 13th century would think of themselves as
a French person. You know what I mean?
So, yes, I do know what you mean. I
do think people thought of themselves as they identified
themselves by the, the region that they lived in
rather than by the name of the country. But
I, I, you raise a really interesting question here
because what we do have from Hammurabi's reign is
a lot of his correspondence which was found and
um especially correspondence with some of his high officials.
And he had this man whose name was Shamash
Shazier, who worked for him in the region of
Larsa where after he'd conquered Larsa and Shamash Hazier
got letters from Hammurabi saying I heard from such
and such a man and he's a gardener and
you've given his field to someone else. Now, that's
really interesting because this gardener wrote to Hammurabi directly
to the king to claim to make the, you
know, to say someone's taken away my land. Could
you do something about it? And there are enough
of these letters that it does actually imply that
people knew who the king was and knew that
if they had a real concern, he was the
person to appeal to and that he would be
the one to try and work it out. So
I think even though we don't have much that's
written someone hiring a scribe and, and writing a
letter to the king in that way does suggest
that people knew who the king was. Yeah, and
how to get hold of him. And it also
always strikes me just because we have so we
have this very small part of his correspondence, just
his correspondence with Sino Diam and Shamash Shazer and
a few other people, there must have been a
lot more that the king was on top of
so much stuff. I mean, he was, he was
literally writing Shama Shazi saying this gardener whose name
is such and such, you need to make sure
he gets his, his fields back if he's doing
that all across his country. That's, that's an enormous
amount of real, almost micromanagement. So I think unlike
your medieval peasants, I, I do suspect that they
had a sense of who the king was partly
because of the year names, but partly also because
they did intervene quite a lot in, in the
individual lives. They also called people up for military
service. They called people up for Corvey labor. I
mean labor, laboring on, on city walls and canals
and ditches and so forth. All of which also
was um probably a reminder of who the king
was.
Yeah. And I would imagine that at least when
they were in the military or doing military service,
they would be told that they would be fighting
for Babylonia or a or Sumer or some other
place.
Yes. I don't know if they would be told
they were fighting for the king or if they
were fighting for the country. I don't know. That's
a really interesting question. Or perhaps more likely they
were fighting for Marduk. The God might be the
way that they would raise it. That might have
been true. Yeah, that's interesting. You've actually sort of
got me thinking about all, all sorts of aspects
of this in terms of how we could prove
whether or not they knew who the king was
and the soldiers, at least in Hamma Ai's time
again, going back to the old Babylonian period, they
were provided, not with um, a salary, they were
provided with fields, which was called an Ilham. That
their family would farm and that would support them
would support the family so that they would then
be available to go off on campaign during the,
the season when they weren't farming after the harvest.
And so I think again, there, the Ilham directly
comes from the king. He's the person who gives
you your income. So I do think that anyone
who was in this, there's such a lot of
ways in which the, the, the court and the,
and the, and the palace were intertwined with the
economy that I think, I think you would have
a hard time not knowing who the king was
if you were involved in any way in any
of those things.
No, be because, uh, uh, uh, at least from
my perspective it would be extremely interesting to really
try to put myself into the shoes of someone
who lived back then in, I don't know, Babylonia
Suma. And to really try to imagine how would
they move in that world, how they would think
about their own group, identity if they would be
aware of where they were in terms of the
identity of their nation or kingdom or empire and
so on. So that, that, that would be very
interesting to know.
Yeah, even though we don't have, they didn't have
maps with borders on them during the, during some
of the wars in the old Abalon period, especially
before Hammurabi's time, there were these battles that went
on. And in fact, I I wrote about this
in weaver scribes and kings that there are cities
where each time a king takes control, the year
names change. And so you go from being your
years are in the name of the local king
to the years of the king of Larsa and
then the king of is in takes over. And
so it's his year names. And these, you see
this switch back and forth. So in that little
city, they are aware of who they're subject to
because they have to change their dating system and,
and that was enforced by the king. So we
do see that they are even though they may
not be a map saying you are currently in
Een. Oh no, you're currently in Larsa. There was
a, a an awareness because that's who they were
paying their taxes to and that's who they had
to date their documents by.
So just uh before we finish, I have a
couple more questions about how you think uh as
an historian who studies Ancient Mesopotamia about the, the
legacy of Mesopotamia, actually, because we've talked here about
things like writing about some uh some city is
about systems of law. Uh uh THE uh Arabi's
code, for example, about mechanisms of diplomacy, about certain
institutions that were created or existed back then. So,
I mean, a lot of these still exists today
actually,
right? I think some of them, you can draw
a direct line and you can see how they've
influenced the modern world without interruption. Others, it's harder
to see that direct line. I think diplomacy actually,
one can trace all the way from their system
of diplomacy to the present. I don't think it
was ever completely lost. I think that the the
structures that they developed probably do have um echoes
today. And I should point out this is very
much the legacy in the Middle East um is
very powerful. I think sometimes Western scholars tend to
think about the, the legacy in, in Europe and
in the Americas and so forth. But in the
Middle East, there's a huge legacy of this which
is their own native culture coming through um all
of the periods that have, have developed since. And
I talking to, to um scholars of the modern
Middle East, we often will say, oh, you know,
that's that was happening. You know, some people, they'll
be talking about something in say um in the
16th century. And you can see how it has
its, its origins way back in the, in the
ancient Middle East. And so there's, there's a, a
lot of the world benefited from all of these
developments that, that came out of, of Mesopotamia and,
and elsewhere in the ancient Middle East. Writing, certainly,
even though the writing system, Jon was lost writing
as a phenomenon. Writing as a system of, of
keeping track of things. Yeah, huge impact. The very
idea of having a judicial system quite aside from
writing laws is so ancient and the idea that
you do not just engage in vigilante justice that
you have a system set up where there are
judges who are recognized as having authority and having
wisdom. And, and this is really important. I think
the Mesopotamian system, they tried to make it um
corruption proof. They really tried to make sure that
you couldn't gain the system that you couldn't be
above the law that you couldn't be um someone
who got away with things and the judges could
be penalized if they took bribes. There, there were
lots of, of real attempts to make it a
fair system. And I think that's clearly a legacy
as well. Monumental architecture, cities living in cities in
a way that you people can get along with
one another. Um There's, there's just so, so much
and then the, the most obvious one which people
always bring up is, is the, the 60 seconds
in, in a minute and the 60 minutes in
an hour, that's, that's Mesopotamia. They had a, a
60 based numerical system and so 360 degrees in
a circle, that's them. All of those are, are
directly come directly from, from Mesopotamia. The anything with
a base 60 is theres.
And even though when it comes to science, if
I remember correctly, they also studied the stars, the
movement of the planets, dates of eclipses and stuff
like
that. Yes, very much. They, they, they studied the
sky, um the night sky largely because they wanted
to know the will of the gods, which was
not why we do it today, but they um
named the constellations and many of their names translate
into the names that we used that they had
the same, they saw the same images in the
sky that continued to be seen as the constellations.
They identified the five visible planets and uh and
tracked them through the night sky. And so, yes,
they could, they could actually predict eclipses of the
sun and the moon. They weren't quite sure where
they were going to appear. And so sometimes of
course, they were wrong and they didn't see the,
the eclipse as anticipated because it wasn't, it wasn't,
they weren't in line in the line of it,
but they were very, very good astronomers. They were
also very good mathematicians. They had figured out what
we think of as the Pythagorean theorem. Way back
in Hammurabi's time. I think it was lost and
Pythagoras rediscovered it. I don't think Pythagoras was, was
sort of stealing from the mesopotamians. But uh it,
it was known they, they had that they um
they had a number of uh military techniques, for
example, that also, for example, the chariot was AAA
low engineer East. And well, it was certainly somewhere
in the Middle East that they invented the chariot
and it spread fast if it in fact spread
all the way to China. So the Shang dynasty
chariot is clearly uh AAA Middle Eastern chariot that
was, was adopted over a long distance. Um They
developed the phalanx formation of the soldiers back in
the third millennium BC. So it's often attributed to
the Greeks being the first ones to come up
with that, but it was clearly being used. You
can see it from the artwork in the, in
the third millennium. And the art influenced gosh, you
know, the Mesopotamian art, the, the um Assyrian art
influenced the Persians. It influenced the uh the Greeks.
There was, there's almost more than one can think
of in terms of how much it has contributed
to the, to the world.
And one thing just to put things into perspective
here, one thing that I find really fascinating when
reading about the mesopotamians, for example, in other peoples
is that we tend to have these very, let's
say, solidified the idea that people back then were
extremely different from what we are nowadays. But I
mean, even though we have perhaps uh different technology,
different building materials and uh different jobs. I mean,
there are many aspects of our daily lives, the
things we worry about the institutions we have that
are actually perhaps not that different.
Yes, it's really true. II, I go back and
forth on this because on the one hand, I
want my students to realize things were very different.
They especially things like religion and um, and technology,
of course, we, we do everything by the clock.
They didn't have a clock. There's, there's a number
of ways in which life was very different, but
we have this shared humanity and I do think
that that really comes out that you're right. They
worried about their families. Um, SOMEBODY left on a
trip and they would write letters to one another
to make sure they were OK. They would uh
be concerned about their Children. They, uh they ate
the same, many of the same things we do
today. In fact, the recipes that have been found
from Mesopotamia, you can cook them. They're delicious. They
had, they had houses, they had streets, they had
cities, they had so many things that we still,
we still live with. And I, I've often thought
that if um humankind manages to survive for another
10,000, 20,000 years, they'll look back at our culture
and see really strong connections. I mean, that we
will probably be in the ancient world to them.
They'll, they'll, the ancient world will cover Mesopotamia too.
Who knows? The industrial revolution maybe. But, but so
much of what um was set in place in,
in the ancient Middle East, but also in other
ancient cultures around the world has continued, has, has
it worked well? It, it's, it hasn't been um
it hasn't been radically changed, things like justice and
um and farming and, and so forth. It, it's
become more technologically advanced, but the way we cook
is the way we cook, still those things we
share a lot.
Uh And just one final question then, then this
is more of a, let's say, philosophical slash existential
question because there's always the aspect that uh lots
of uh the history of Mesopotamia w was just
historically sp speaking very recently uncovered and some of
it could have been lost forever. And perhaps there
are pieces of it that will actually be lost
forever. So I mean, when it comes to, let's
say being a, a king, being an emperor, being
someone with very high status in a given society
and perhaps being very arrogant that we will be
remembered forever. I mean, when you study history, don't
you sometimes get that, uh, sense that perhaps, oh,
my God may maybe even if people reach very
high status in their society. Uh, I mean, there's
always the risk that they will actually not be
remembered forever. I mean, is that something that you
think about,
or? I actually, it's funny because I think about
the, the, the flip side to that, which is
that what is so surprising because the Mesopotamians wrote
on clay and clay is pretty indestructible. We know
the names of so many people who would never
have dreamed that they would be remembered. I, I've
done this um I published in um eon magazine
on online an article about Gimel Karak. Gimel Karak
was a barber. He was an important barber. He
was a barber to the king, but he was,
he was a barber in a small town. I
know so much about him. I know the name
of his son. I know who his neighbors were.
I can reconstruct what his life was like. And
that I think is, is, is the, is the,
is the sort of, as I said, the flip
side of someone who was really, really powerful at
the time when we've forgotten about them. Yeah. OK.
But how exciting that we can bring life back
to people who would never have dreamed they would
be remembered. And here we are talking about them
thousands of years later because they left a written
record. Somebody left a written record of them. There's
even a woman named Zoo who I wrote about
in, in weaver scribes and kings. She was a
textile worker. She was a very poor woman, but
she worked her way up to be the supervisor
of her weaving team in the palace at the
city of Gir. And we, we can talk about
Zoom and there she is, she's, she's a real
person and she's got a real name and we
can, we can sort of bring her back in
an interesting way because of these documents being found.
And I think future archaeologists will no doubt, find
more um can from tablets. There's certainly more to
be found and they will decipher and, and translate
more of the ones that we already have and
more and more people will come to light. But
the kings, I think a lot of the kings
who wanted to be remembered are remembered. And it's
sort of funny because there's some of them tried
so hard. There was a king named Shogi who
actually had hymns written to himself. He's one of
those rare kings who did claim to be a
God. And um, and they would, they, he insisted
that the scribes copy the, the hymns to his
greatness in their scribal school. And it worked, you
know, we've, we've got those hymns, we know that
she thought he was pretty great stuff. But I
am more intrigued by the people who didn't try
so hard and yet we still know who they
are.
Great. So uh just before we go, would you
like to tell people where they can find you
and your work on the internet? And of course,
I'm also leaving a link to your books on
Amazon. So,
yes, I'm, I'm still on what the, the platform
formerly known as Twitter, which is where I tend
to put on the X I tend to put
out information about talks. I'm doing, I'm also on
Instagram and I I, when I'm doing a talk
or any kind of a project or, or like
this podcast, I will put that on Instagram as
well. Um So those are the places to find
me and yes, please on Amazon. Um MY books
are all on there and uh I also did
the audio version, I'm the reader for my uh
the audible version of we scribes and Kings. And
as you very kindly mentioned, I also did a
series for one. So you can find me on
one which is the great courses. Uh There's a
whole lecture series there.
Great. So I'm leaving some links to that in
the description box of the interview as well. And
Doctor Podany, thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. I really
love the conversation.
Thank you. I really enjoyed it as well. Thank
you so much.
Hi, guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors,
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and H
her meal and Lain Jung Y and the K
Hes Mark Smith J Tom. Humble s friends, David
Sloan Wilson. Ya de ro Ro Diego. Jan Punter
Rozman Charlotte Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi
Alek medicine, Gary G Alman, Sam of Zal Ari
and YPJ Barboza, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franca Beto Lati Gilon Cortez Solis Scott
Zachary FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter
Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson, Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey
Junior, Old Ebon Starry, Michael Bailey, then Spur by
Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory. Kimberley
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week, Linda Brendan Nicholas
Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perras,
Kate Von Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud
Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings
David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers is our
web, Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom Wig and Bernard
N Cortes Dixon Benedikt Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine and
Patrick Tobin John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick
Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi,
Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.